It's time to flaunt your inner designer because we're about to learn some CSS.
To start off, I want to show you this website.
If you look at it.
Well, it's it's quite, quite pretty.
Look at that.
That's really nice.
Now, hopefully in the future we can create something like this.
But I want to show you what this website will look like without CSIS.
Here it is.
Pretty impressive, right?
With just CSIS, you'll be able to create something like this.
So let's get started, shall we?
I've created here for us a simple website.
Nothing that we haven't seen before.
You can see that I have created semantic tags with header nav, an unordered list that has some links.
ap2 and a P tag that's wrapped in another semantic tag called section.
So again, nothing crazy.
If I go to the about page, it's the exact same thing except for the about ally doesn't have an anchor
tag and then same with login.
So let's talk about CSIS.
The way that we would add CSIS to something like this is while we create a CSIS file.
So let's do that.
I'm going to create a new file that I'm going to save.
Let's call it style dot.
CSIS.
If I save that, you'll see at the bottom over here that sublime text now has CSS as the file type.
The rules with CSIS are very simple.
We essentially have a selector and then we have the squiggly brackets, and within it we put our property.
Semicolon and then value.
And then we have this special character as well at the end.
And that is pretty much CSIS.
You know this you can write CSIS just like a QML.
Just a couple of syntactic rules.
And once you get used to it, it's very, very simple.
But obviously this doesn't really mean anything.
So let's write actual code here.
I'm going to comment that out by again, doing command slash and sublime text.
You can see that the commenting is different than in HTML.
And let's say that we want to make this home text read.
The way we would do it is we want to select what's called the selector.
So here we want to say that the H two, we want that to be read.
So all I would say is h to curly brackets.
And then within here I want to say the property, I want to change the color to the value that is read.
So if I save that.
And refresh.
Well, nothing happens.
And that's obvious, right?
Because how does this file know that this file exists?
We have to link it somehow, and we do that in the head.
And we haven't talked too much about the tag element in the HTML section, but by now you can probably
tell that head just contains information about what the page needs.
Maybe not the stuff that we see on a web page other than the title, but meta tags and information that
we need for the website.
Okay.
So in here we can actually link to this style sheet that we call style dot CSS with a link tag.
And this link tag allows us to link this HTML file to something else.
And again, Sabine, Tex.
Has something very useful here.
If I hit tab.
Look at that.
It fills it for me.
These are the standard attributes that you'll see to link to CSS, so you just have to get used to it
and eventually it'll become second nature.
So we have our L here, which is the added attribute for relation.
It just specifies what relationship this link will have and we have the default stylesheet.
And then for the type, this is the media type.
We want to say that it's a text CSS file.
We're essentially telling HTML, hey, just a heads up, we're linking to a file here and in the ref.
This should be familiar.
We're going to link to style CSS.
So if I type in style dot CSS.
And safe.
Let's refresh.
Turns red.
And just to let you know that index.html is in the same folder as stylesheet CSS, we can check it over
here if I click on exercise.
You see that?
Yep.
I have style dot css with indexed html.
Perfect.
Okay.
Now, what if we also want to make the paragraph over here, the zipper color as well?
Well, again, we would do the selector and then we'll do color and let's do pink.
I save refresh and it's pink.
Hopefully you can see that.
You also see here that sublime text does some really nice coloring for us.
So if I, for example, I put a property that doesn't exist like a misspelled color, well, you see
that it doesn't highlight it properly with the blue color and you know that you've made a mistake.
Again, another great feature of sublime text.
So CC, what what does it actually stand for?
Well, it stands for cascading style sheets and style sheets that make sense that we're creating style
sheets.
But what does cascading mean?
Well, cascading means that it always takes the selector that is at the end.
And that's simplified terms.
But I want to demonstrate for you what that means.
So let's say at the bottom over here, I do this again paragraph.
I want color to be green.
Well, if I save this, what do you think will happen?
Let's refresh and see.
It turns green.
And why is that?
Well, because it's cascading.
It's saying, okay, I'll set H to to red.
I'll set paragraph to pink.
And then it says, okay, I'll set P to green.
So you can see here, as it trickles down and cascades, it takes the last input that it receives for
a specific selector.
We'll get more into the cascading effects of CSS in a later video, but I want you to understand the
basic concept around it.
I also wanted to show you something cool that you can do with Chrome, and we did this in the first
couple of video series, but now you'll actually understand what it means.
So again, view developer, developer tools and from now on I'll be using this shortcut to open it and
you'll be able to do it as well.
And if you remember, we have our style tab.
And if we click on the style tab, we have the HTML on the left styles over here and nothing for the
styles.
But if I now go into my.
Home and I click on that.
It'll show you color red.
So Google Chrome allows us to see our CSS styles.
So I can even add stuff here and I could say background color.
Let's do black.
Look at that.
So this is a really good way to play with your website and add colors.
You can check and uncheck here.
And also, if you see something on a website that you really, really like, you can go to that element.
Let's let's try it off here.
Let's go to.
Wait.
But why dot.com?
And let's say that we really, really want to know how.
This was me.
We can right click.
To inspect.
We'll take us exactly to that element.
And then we can see here some of the properties, the CSS properties that they've used.
And same here.
You can see that the background color is this and so on and so forth.
Okay.
Let's close that for now.
The last thing I want to leave you with is what if?
Let's close this.
What if I also want the above page to have styles?
And same with the login page.
As you can see, there's no style for these ones, but we want the same thing for the about and login
page.
Well, as you can imagine, we copy the link tag.
And we go to about.
We link it on to here and then log in.
We can again link it here.
I save both of these files and now if I refresh and go to about look at that.
We have our styles.
And you may be wondering, well, what if I want different styles?
Maybe for the login.
I want this to be blue instead.
Well, we can actually create multiple style sheets.
So I can say, for example, let's create a new file and we'll call it style two dot CSS.
I save that.
And this time I'm going to say that I want my H to.
To have color blue.
I say that I go into my login HTML and now I'll make login reference the second stylesheet instead of
the first one.
So now if I refresh.
Log in is referencing our style to CSIS, but all the other ones are still referencing the old one.
Ally There is one last thing that I want to add, and that is that this is the common way of adding
styles.
But there is actually two other ways that you won't see as often, especially when you're starting off.
But I wanted to show it to you so that you're not surprised.
The first way of doing it is something called inline styles.
And this was the original way that we incorporate as styles into our HTML, and that is by specifying
within the element.
Let's say let's go with header over here.
We want to say style.
So it has a style attribute and then within here we can do background color.
Let's do green and refresh and we're at the about page right now.
We change that for index.html.
So let's go over here and look at that.
We have the green background and if you want to add more, again, we do color red.
Let's save and refresh and look at that.
The header has the color red and you'll see here that these ones are still purple because they are linked
tags and they have the default linking.
Okay.
So that's one way and the third and last way is in the head, you can actually create style tags and
then within these style tags.
You can enter CSS.
So if you just refresh here.
So we have a fresh, clean slate.
I can now say all the p tags or let's do ly this time.
So all the lists.
I want the list to have.
Background color of purple.
So find how.
Save this and refresh.
Everything is purple and that looks pretty yucky.
You can keep adding stuff on here and I can say color white, save, refresh.
And it changed the color to white.
Now you may be wondering, why don't we just do it like this?
This seems a lot simpler than linking to another CSS file.
Well, the reason is that for this website, everything is fairly small.
It's just a couple of lines of CSS.
But you can imagine with websites, as they get bigger and bigger, you'll have hundreds and hundreds
of lines of CSS.
And having one massive file will be very, very challenging to maintain.
You can also think of it as if you are working on an HTML and you also had a team of designers that
were working on a CSS file.
You want to have a separation where you have some team members working on the CSS and then some team
members working on the HTML.
And that is a concept called separation of concerns.
It's a fancy way of saying that everybody just worry about what they're good at.
So HTML just worry about text and CSS, just worry about styles.
This phrase separation of concerns is something that will encounter throughout later videos when we
get into JavaScript and react.
And it's a very, very important concept in web development and computer science in general.
So we will get back to that.
But you know that it'll be a phrase that will keep coming up.
So for now.
Let's delete this.
Let's keep things the way that we have it.
Let's refresh.
And in the next video, I'm going to show you a couple of CSS properties that are more exciting than
just color and background.
I'll see you in that one.
Bye bye.